[Music]
one military-intelligence the political
balance of the great powers of Europe in
1914 constituted a delicate Newtonian
system any weakening or strengthening on
the part of one resulted in a
corresponding oscillation on the part of
all the others a jolt to the
arrangements and the potential for
unleashing aggressions of enormous
magnitude with three pistol shots at
Sarajevo a match was flung into the
powder keg of European politics on
August 1st Germany declared war on
Russia and on France two days later
while simultaneously invading Belgium
Britain came to war against the Kaiser
on the next day during the rest of the
month
President Wilson issued a series of
neutrality proclamations American
intelligence activities however were
already underway in the war zone quote
Colonel Richard H Williams a captain of
Coast artillery when sent abroad with a
group of American military observers in
the summer of 1914 was one who not only
experienced some of the hazards of a spy
inside the enemy's lines being
repeatedly bathed in chilling German
suspicions but who also was destined to
take part in striking and important and
officially authenticated Secret Service
exploit of the AEF Williams observed the
war for three years before becoming
another of its multitude of combatants
his first duty assisting Americans
stranded in Europe took him to Belgium
and he was there when the steel-tipped
tide of von Klux and von Bulow zarm ease
and undated that land after which he was
sent to Constantinople aboard the USS
North Carolina to serve as military
attache under Ambassador Henry
Morgenthau he was the only anti che with
the Turkish forces on the Gallipoli
Peninsula and the only American who saw
from the defenders side the desperate
landings and attacks of the British and
colonial troops of Sir Ian Hamilton
after the British Abele commanded by Sir
Charles Monroe affected their masterly
evacuation of the peninsula Colonel
Williams accompanied a Bulgarian army to
the de Bruijn and watched bull Gers and
Germans mopping up strong contingents of
Romanians and Russians in January 1917
the War Department in Washington ordered
its widely experienced antosha a home
end quote footnote Richard Wilmer Rouen
with Robert G Dean dorver Secret Service
33 centuries of espionage London William
Kimber 1969 page 569 random observers
however were no substitute for a
continuous and mature military
intelligence organization as the war
raged on in Europe Maj van diemen became
increasingly worried over the prospect
of the United States entering the
hostilities with virtually no
intelligence arrangements established
when on April 6th 1917 a declaration of
war against Germany was effected Van
Diemen met personally with the chief of
staff to plead for an Intelligence Unit
general Scott said no the plea was again
made but to no avail
with his third try Van Diemen was told
to cease his efforts and to not approach
Secretary of War Newton D Baker with the
idea van diemen
circumvented this order shortly after
his last meeting with the chief of staff
he found himself escorting novelist
Gertrude Atherton on visits to training
camps in the Washington area convincing
her of the perilous 'no sub the
intelligence situation he asked her to
put his case before Baker the next day
he planted the same story with the
District of Columbia Police Chief who is
not only Van Diemen's friend but also
breakfasted regularly with the Secretary
of War quote the dual attack brought
results by April 30th Baker was on the
phone instructing the president of the
Army War College
to have Van Diemen report to him at once
after an hour's conversation Baker told
Van Diemen that within 48 hours an order
would be on its way to the president of
the War College setting up a new
intelligence section by May 3rd Van
Diemen had his intelligence bureau and
complete charge of it he also had been
promoted from major to lieutenant
colonel from that time on the military
intelligence force had grown by means of
commissioning civilians in the Army
Reserve and by use of volunteer
investigators Van Diemen's agents were
soon scattered about the country working
undercover
among the IWW in the northwest and among
the enemy aliens in New York
Philadelphia and Chicago in July 1917
Van Diemen had started a plant
protection section which placed
undercover operatives in defense plants
by August his men were so involved in
investigating and arresting civilians
that Attorney General Gregory had to
complain to Baker
whereupon Baker had ordered military
intelligence agents report all enemy
agents to the Justice Department instead
of pursuing investigations and causing
arrests
end quote ultimately Van Diemen's
ventures into civilian law enforcement
would cost him his intelligence
leadership in the spring of 1918 while
Congress was enacting the Sedition Act
Van Diemen continued to build his
network of secret agents spies and
volunteer operatives from the beginning
of America's entry into the war van
diemen had utilized the services of
volunteer Patriots eager to report on
their neighbors some of this information
might have been reliable most of it was
gossip and some amounted to lies and
slurs while the American Protective
League an organization of voluntary
sleuths had been established with the
encouragement of the Justice Department
as an auxilary and former enforcement
body Van Diemen had eagerly utilized its
services and nourished its development
now he cultivated a very select cadre of
secret agents in
the Midwest quote he was inclined to
avoid going to the state councils of
defense sub-national affiliates of the
Federal Council of National Defense
which functioned as an administrative
coordinating body during the World War
two likely to have been involved in
politics he thought he had different men
in mind a retired Brigadier General in
Minnesota a retired Army officer in
Nashville Tennessee members of the
volunteer Medical Service Corps American
Federation of Labor informants groups of
private detectives from mining and
industry an agent of the Norfolk and
Western Railway Company volunteered to
supply operatives a Denver man promised
to obtain the services of detectives
hired by mining and industrial companies
in Colorado an agent for a railway and
Virginia promised to do the same a
lawyer from Kansas City was to organize
Missouri another from Indianapolis was
to organize Indiana three attorneys from
Kansas City Kansas were to form the
nucleus of a group for their state and
all of these will be working entirely
for the military end quote
when Secretary of War Baker returned to
Washington from a tour in Europe he
learned of Van Diemen's recruitment
efforts and promptly attempted to
restrain the military Sluis Van Diemen
was ordered to overseas duty and
Lieutenant Colonel Marlborough Churchill
was detailed to head the Military
Intelligence Division the immediate spy
network Van Diemen was attempting to
establish was abandoned but other
operating secret agent arrangements
appear to have remained in place
footnote Ben demons interest in
intelligence and concern for internal
security remained strong after he
departed M ID he seemingly retained his
ties to old volunteer intelligence
operatives and when he retired from the
Army in 1929 he was given to civilian
employees filing cabinets and working
materials by the military to start a
private intelligence organization he
apparently built a huge store of files
on
American left-wing political activists
ranging from responsible liberals to
avowed communists these files were
divided the major portion being taken
over by 6th army headquarters which
maintained them until 1968 when they
were sent to Fort Holabird and Maryland
in 1970 when the Army was under
congressional investigation for its
political surveillance practices the
decision was made to give up custody of
the papers to not subject them to the
scrutiny of army historians as they were
too politically sensitive materials and
to donate them instead to the Senate
Internal Security subcommittee which had
by prearrangement officially requested
them these papers are apparently still
within these subcommittees control the
portion of Van Diemen's files not taken
over by the army remained in California
at the San Diego research library a
private institution created in 1952 by
three of Van Diemen's closest associates
Major General George W Fisher of the
California National Guard colonel Frank
C forward commander of intelligence
operations of the California Guard and
Alfred Loveland a San Diego businessman
the files were maintained and built upon
until 1962 during this time three
California governors utilized the files
to check on the backgrounds of
prospective State appointees in 1962
California Attorney General Stanley
mosque seized the files on the grounds
that they had been used quote by
unauthorized persons for political
purposes end quote
after a threatened court suit by the San
Diego research library the files were
returned and were placed in a vault in
the San Diego trust and insurance
company of which Colonel forward was an
officer when asked in 1971 if the files
were still in San Diego colonel forward
said yes but quote I can't tell you
where end quote when asked who was in
charge of them he responded I'm not at
liberty to talk about that
see New York Times July 9th 1971 also
mid September 7th 1971 the son of a
professor of sacred rhetoric at the end
/ Theological Seminary Marlborough
Churchill was born in 1878 at Andover
prepared for college at Phillips Academy
there and was subsequently graduated
from Harvard in 1930 Qing English at his
alma mater for one year he obtained a
commission as a second lieutenant of
artillery and launched on a military
career having served in various
artillery commands Churchill became
editor of the Field Artillery Journal
1914 to 1916 while also performing
duties as inspector instructor of the
National Guard Field Artillery of
Virginia Pennsylvania and the District
of Columbia from January 1916 to June
1917 he served as a military observer
with the French army in the field next
was detailed to general Pershing's staff
until February 1918 when he became
acting chief of staff of the Army
artillery first army division in May
1918 he returned to the United States
and became assistant chief of staff and
director of the Military Intelligence
Division holding that position until
1922 he retired from active duty in 1930
and died in 1947 he appears to have had
no intelligence experience before
assuming command of M ID and to have had
no association with intelligence
operations after leaving the division
while Churchill inherited and retained
Van Diemen's private spy network and an
official structure of regional domestic
personnel defense plant operatives
overseas anti-phase and observers the
AEF intelligence structure and a variety
of special agents his tenure of office
at Mi D did have its own unique aspects
footnote one of these special agents was
mrs. Arthur M Blake a newspaper
correspondent accredited
to the New York Evening Post and The
Baltimore Sun who is in the employee of
Churchill sending messages and
observations out of Moscow during the
war with Jewish refugees fleeing across
the border into Finland she later
provided similar services while
stationed in Japan Sakhalin and
Manchuria and footnote general patency
March was brought back from France to
become chief of staff in March 1918 and
he effected certain changes in army
structure under general order number
eighty of August 26th 1918 a variety of
organizational refinements were made
within the army and certain units of the
War Department one of these was the
upgrading of the Military Intelligence
Division quote which had previously been
a branch first of the war plans division
and later of the executive division as a
separate and coordinate division of the
general staff end quote
footnote Otto L Nelson national security
and the general staff Washington
Infantry Journal press 1946 page 232 end
footnote also because the Wilson
administration was unwilling to impose
wartime price controls and organized
labor retaliated with a series of
crippling strikes federal troops were
pressed into duty to man facilities or
maintain peace where labor unrest
prevailed when the army became
interested in labor disturbances
military intelligence took to the field
a vast counter espionage Network
resulted and unions became suspicious of
Churchill's intentions writing in the
Journal of the United States artillery
for April 19-20 Churchill outlined
functions which mig had performed during
the war and armistice footnote C
Marlborough Churchill the Military
Intelligence Division general journal of
the United States artillery the 52 April
1922 9333 16 end footnote formerly
General Orders 80 of August 26th 1918
had said that the military intelligence
division quote shall have cognizance and
control of military intelligence both
positive and negative and shall be in
charge of an officer designated as the
director of military intelligence who
will be an assistant to the chief of
staff he is also the chief military
censor the duties of this division are
to maintain estimates revised daily of
the military situation the economic
situation and of such other matters as
the chief of staff may direct and to
collect collate and disseminate military
intelligence it will cooperate with the
intelligence section of the general
staffs of Allied countries in connection
with military intelligence prepare
instructions in military intelligence
work for the use of our forces supervise
the training of personnel for
intelligence work organized direct and
coordinate the intelligence service
supervise the duties of military
anti-phase communicate direct with
department intelligence officers and
intelligence officers at posts camps and
stations and with commands in the field
and matters relating to military
intelligence obtain reproduce and issue
maps translate foreign documents
dispersed and account for intelligence
funds cooperate with the censorship
board and with intelligence agencies of
other departments of the government
end quote by Churchill's own account M
ID had responsibility for one retention
of combat intelligence experience
information to application of combat
intelligence historical information to
training programs three awareness of
combat intelligence developments and
other armies for conducting internal
service loyalty investigations
quote if a state of war makes such
investigation necessary we want it done
by agencies under our own control and
not be unsympathetic civilian bureaus
and quote v detection of sabotage graft
and fraud within the army six foreign
map collection seven
preparation of terrain handbooks 8
supervision of information collection by
military attache x' footnote quote the
information obtained by attache x' is of
two kinds general and technical the
general information is subdivided into
military economic political and
psychological information the technical
information consists of all data
connected with scientific developments
as they relate to the military
profession and the large capital's
officers who have specialized in
aviation and ordnance are assigned as
assistants in order that these matters
may be handled properly
as soon as such information is received
M ID at once makes a distribution which
aims to place the information in the
hands of the technical service or the
civil official who can best evaluate it
and see that it is used and quote
Churchill pages 301 and 302 and footnote
preservation of the history and
experiences of international duty
expeditions footnote examples of such
expeditions offered by the author
included General Leonard woods
administration of Cuba the China relief
expedition the military government of
the Philippine Islands the Siberian
expeditionary force United States forces
at Archangel duty at the Paris Peace
Conference General Harry Brand Holtz's
mission to Hungary and General James
Harvard's mission to Turkey end footnote
10 initiating and sustaining the
interest and knowledge of officers in
general in foreign languages foreign
countries and in the currents of
historical events which produce world
situations
end quote 11 determining the tactical
intelligence duties of the troops
subsection footnote according to the
author these duties included 1
preparation of instructions for
intelligence work with troops and
methods to be used in intelligence
instruction in the army liaison with WPD
war plans division u.s. MA the United
States military
Academy at West Point air service and
garrison schools and with g2 of
departments and troop units to
preparation of tables of organization
insofar as they concern intelligence
work with troops revision of general
orders army regulations etc insofar as
they affect troop intelligence work
liaison with war plans Division three
consideration of questions pertaining to
troop intelligence work a observation B
transmission of information C location
of our own frontlines D listening in
both of enemy lines and of our own e
general subject of wireless
interceptions F general subject of
trench codes G information to be
obtained from flash and sound ranging
services etc liaison with equipment
branch operations division and artillery
and branch information services for
consideration of subject of tactical
information to be obtained from and
furnished to artillery information
service liaison with artillery
information service v general subject of
branch intelligence work liaison with
air service information service six
general subject of aerial photographic
interpretation seven consideration of
needs for special tactical manuals
handbooks maps etc for use of troops or
in intelligence training liaison with
operations and war plans division when
necessary eight consideration of the
general question of the use of false
information and of the methods by which
it should be used liaison with
psychologic section mi to nine
intelligence personnel for duty with
troops utilization of trained personnel
now in the army and in civil life ten
the spotting of new foreign tactical
methods devices plans and projects
eleven the maintenance of liaison with
all american GH cues that may now or
hereafter be in existence twelve study
of foreign intelligence systems
Churchill pages 302 through 303 in
footnote 12 forecasting international
and domestic security situations in what
was called a normal product footnote
this normal product with the exception
of map and terrain handbook information
consists of a the current estimate of
the strategic situation be the situation
monographs see the weekly summary and in
emergencies the daily summary D the
original sources or supporting data upon
which a B and C are based II the weekly
survey of the United States the current
estimate of the strategic situation is
arrived at by the correct use of a
checklist known as the strategic index
which guides not only the officer who
collates the information but also the
officer or agent who collects it the
strategic index is based upon the
assumption previously stated that the
situation in any given country may be
divided into four main factors the
combat factor the economic factor the
political factor and the psychologic
factor each of these factors is divided
subdivided and ree divided until every
point from which constitute the
supporting data upon which rest the
summarized statements is assigned a
number which serves not only as an
identification but also as a convenient
paragraph number when observers reports
are prepared and a page number for the
situation monographs
and which information is collated and
which constitute the supporting data
upon which rest the summarized
statements of the estimate of the
situation the method
thus briefly outlined constitutes what
may be considered a system of philosophy
applied to the gathering and
presentation of information Churchill
pages 304 and 305 and footnote 13 making
translations footnote of the translate
Section mi6 the author writes
theoretically all War Department
translation is centralized in this
section as a practical necessity many of
the technical bureaus during the war
maintained separate translation sections
with the reduction of personnel and
appropriations in other bureaus mi6
will more and more be called upon to
serve the entire army during the past
year this section has translated 60
technical works in seven foreign
languages all the suspect lists
furnished by the French and Italian
intelligence services 1438 letters in 31
different languages as well as 3562
citations of American officers and men
in addition 38 foreign daily papers and
10 different languages from 13 different
countries are read and the important
parts extracted for the other sections
of the division or for the historical
branch of the war plans division the
personnel of this section is competent
to translate 19 foreign languages and by
utilizing the services of temporary
personnel 17 additional languages can be
translated 39 government offices
habitually make use of the services of
this section Churchill page 307 and
footnote 14 developing codes and cyphers
footnote the code and cipher section or
mi-8 was a wartime agency which it is
not practice about to continue in peace
it was secretly maintained after the war
until 1929 and was to become known as
the American black chamber and will be
discussed later in this narrative the
work of this section concerned an
important field of endeavor which before
the war with Germany was almost entirely
unknown to the War Department or to the
government of the United States as a
whole
early in 1917 it was realized not only
that secret means of communication were
essential to the successful prosecution
of the war but also that in order to
combat the means employed by skillful
and crafty
enemy a War Department agency was
required in order to make an exhaustive
study of this complicated subject and to
put to practical use the results of such
study as finally developed this section
comprised five bureaus as follows the
shorthand Bureau organized in response
to demands which came chiefly through
cooperation with the postal censorship
because of the fact that it was almost
impossible for examiner's to
discriminate between unusual shorthand
systems and cipher this Bureau was in a
few months able to transcribe documents
written in some 3-hundred shorthand
systems in seven different languages
secret ink bureau by direct liaison with
the french and british intelligence
services this bureau built up a useful
fund of knowledge covering this hitherto
little-known science which is at once so
useful and so dangerous over fifty
important secret ink spy letters were
discovered which led to many arrests and
prevented much enemy activity prior to
the lifting of the postal censorship an
average of over 2,000 letters per week
were tested for secret inks code
instruction bureau this bureau provided
the necessary practical instructions in
codes and ciphers given to prospective
military anti-phase their assistants and
clerks and to officers and clerical
personnel designated for duty in similar
work in the American Expeditionary
Forces in France and Siberia code
compilation bureau the 1915 war
department code soon fell into the hands
of the enemy and this Bureau was
required to compile military
intelligence code number five which
succeeded it as well as to geographical
codes specifically adapted to the
sending of combat information from
France a casualty code designed to save
errors and time in connection with the
reporting of battle casualties was
commenced in September 1918 it was not
published on account of the signing of
the armistice
but the work on it is complete and
available for future use communication
Bureau
Bureau was the nerve center of a vast
communication system covering the
habitable globe by special wire
connections and a 24-hour service
maintained by skillful and devoted
operators exceptionally fast and
confidential communication was
established with our forces overseas and
all important news centers at home and
abroad messages from Paris were received
and decoded within 20 minutes after
sending and the average time necessary
to communicate with Vladivostok and
Archangel was less than 24 hours from
September 1918 to May 1919 this Bureau
sent and received 25,000 messages
containing 1 million 300,000 words
the only remaining agency of mi-8 is the
present Telegraph or code room which
functions as a part of the
administrative section or mi 11 to a
limited extent it operates as the
communication Bureau did during the war
at this time the American Black Chamber
was operating secretly in New York City
but Churchill may not have known about
its existence or activities
Churchill pages 307 through 309 also see
Herbert o Yardley the American Black
Chamber London Faber and Faber 1931
pages 15 through 166 end footnote and 15
various systemic counterintelligence
efforts
footnote the counterintelligence section
titled the negative branch was formally
organized by Colonel Casey masse teller
and August 1918 reduced in size and
reorganized after the war the negative
branch consisted of the following three
sections by Churchill's description the
foreign influence section mi4 is the
parent section from which grew the
negative branch as delimited by the
diversion of specialties to other
sections the duty of this section in
general is the study of espionage and
propaganda directed against the United
States or against its allies and also
the study of these sentiments
publications and other actions of
foreign language and revolutionary
groups
both here and abroad and so far as these
matters have a bearing upon the military
situation individuals are not
investigated the news section mi 10 is a
combination of a radio interception
section and a press summary section in
addition to the frontier stations it
maintains a transoceanic interception
station in Maine which enables the War
Department to follow promptly foreign
events under the wartime organization of
mi d mi 10 performed such censorship
functions as were assigned to the War
Department the fraud section mi 13
originated in the quartermaster Corps in
the spring of 1918 when at the request
of the quartermaster general an officer
of military intelligence was detailed to
organize a force to detect and prevent
fraud and graft in the purchase and
handling of quartermaster stores on July
13 1918 this force was transferred to
the Military Intelligence Division and
the scope of its duties enlarged to
include the detection of any case of
graft or fraud in or connected with the
army at the beginning this group
constituted a subsection of mi 3 but the
work developed to such an extent that on
September 24th 1918 it was made a
separate section Churchill pages 313 and
314 in footnote to accomplish these
duties the Military Intelligence
Division under Churchill in accordance
with General Orders number 80 was
organized into an administrative section
and three branches as detailed below
military intelligence division
administrative section mi 1a records
accounts and general section be
interpreters and intelligence police
sections see publication daily
intelligence summary weekly summary
activities report the positive branch a
information section mi 2 prepared the
strategic estimate which attempted to
answer the questions what is the
situation today and what
be tomorrow by analyzing the situation
in each country under the military
political economic and psychological
headings be collection section mi5
administered the military attache system
see translations section mi6 D code and
cipher section mi-8 e shorthand Bureau F
secret Inc Bureau G code instruction
Bureau H code compilation Bureau I
communication Bureau J combat
intelligence instruction section mi9 the
geographic branch maps and military
monographs of all countries a may
section mi 7b monograph and handbook
section mi9 the negative branch collects
and disseminates information upon which
may be based measures of prevention
against activities or influences tending
to harm military efficiency by methods
other than armed force a military
influence section mi for the army
section mi 3c news section mi 10d Travel
section
mi 11e fraud section mi 13 at the time
of the signing of the armistice in
November 1918 mi D consisted of two
hundred eighty two officers twenty-nine
noncommissioned officers and 948
civilian employees it is impossible to
estimate how many thousands of volunteer
and secretly recruited private agents
were assisting the staff by August 1919
mi D had been reduced to 88 officers and
143 civilians its forces would continue
to wane during the next two decades
paralleling this structure of mi D was
the intelligence section of the General
Staff of the American Expeditionary
Forces under General John J Pershing
created by General Orders number eight
of July 5th 1917 the General Staff was
directed by General James G Harvard
chief of staff who has commented quote
the intelligence section dealt with a
line of work in which Americans were
less experienced than in any other war
activity America had never admittedly
indulged in a secret service in
espionage or in developing the various
sources of information which furnished
what comes under the general designation
of military intelligence the military
and naval anti Shay's serving with our
legations and embassies abroad while
Alert for information which might be of
advantage to the United States or
without funds for procuring such matter
and were generally dependent upon
military and naval publications open to
anyone who cared to obtain them
occasionally they were thrown a few
crumbs in some foreign capital under the
seal of confidence and more perhaps in
the hope that some third power would be
embarrassed than by the thought that any
real use of them would be made by the
careless and sometimes amusing Americans
certainly censorship was an unknown
activity anywhere under the American
flag intelligence services were highly
developed by our associates and by our
enemies especially had Germany before
the world war maintained a network that
spread through many countries our
intelligence section endeavored to
embody in its organization the best that
could be borrowed from French and
British sources it was responsible for
information on the enemy order of battle
his war trade and economic resources
recruiting and manpower strategical
movements and plans the examination of
prisoners of war and of enemy documents
situation maps from all sources and
information of the theatres of war
immediately behind the enemy lines all
were intelligence compiling information
from aerial photographs and
reconnaissance 'as the enemy wireless
and ciphers signal communication
your pigeons it disseminated information
on these and kindred subjects of
military interest counterespionage
regulation of passes for travel the
preparation of maps of all kinds surveys
and the personnel and activity of the
topographical engineers lay within its
jurisdiction its duties with regard to
censorship were very comprehensive
touching the censorship of the press of
Correspondence by mail messenger and
telegraph as well as that of official
photographs and moving pictures the
Visitors Bureau and the intelligence
personnel vehicles and police besides a
multiplicity of detail involved in these
and kindred matters came under it and
quote footnote James G harbored the
American army in France 1917 to 1919
Boston little brown and company 1936
pages 94 through 95 the man in charge of
the AEF intelligence organization was
Major Dennis een Olin born in 1872 at
Akron New York of Irish immigrant
parents a West Point graduate he served
in infantry and cavalry units prior to
General Staff duty in 1903 seeing
service in Cuba the Philippines and
Alaska arriving in France in June 1917
he served as chief of intelligence
operations under demobilization he was
awarded the Distinguished Service Medal
in 1918 quote for organizing and
administering the AEF intelligence
service end quote and also various
combat decorations after the war nolan
saw duty at the Army War College and
with the General Staff becoming a deputy
chief of staff in 1924 in 1926 and 1927
he was chief of the army representation
with the preparatory commission on
reduction and limitation of armaments
meeting at Geneva he completed his
military career as commander of the 5th
Corps area 1927 through 1931 and 2nd
Corps area 1931 through 1936 retiring in
Nolan apparently had autonomy of command
apart from em ID although there seems to
have been close cooperation in
information exchange and dissemination
between the two organizations it is very
likely that Nolan and Churchill were
personally acquainted as both men joined
Pershing's staff in France in June 1917
according to har board the AEF
intelligence unit was organized into
five sections with the following areas
of supervisory responsibilities
specified g2a information 1 enemy's
order of battle enemy organization
preparation of diagrams and statements
showing distribution of enemy's forces
war trade and enemy's economic resources
to German recruiting and classes
manpower examination of prisoners and
documents information on German armament
and equipment translations 3 situation
maps except special maps made by g3
information of theater of war behind
enemy's front German lines of defense
strategical movements of enemy and plans
air reconnaissance and photographs for
preparation and issue of periodical
summary information concerning railroads
bridges canals and rivers road and
bridge maps and area books summary of
foreign communique and wireless press 5
collation of information regarding
enemy's artillery preparation of daily
and weekly summaries of enemy's
artillery activity preparation of
periodical diagrams showing enemy's
artillery grouping 6 enemy's Wireless
and ciphers enemy's signal
communications policy regarding
preparation and issue of ciphers and
trench codes listening sets policy as
regards carrier pigeons training of
listening set of interpreters 7 dissent
of information custody and issue of
intelligence publications information of
theater of war except portion
immediately in rear of enemy's front
intelligence Diary be Secret Service one
Secret Service and tactical zone and
coordination with War Department and
with French English and Belgian system
atrocities and breaches of international
law counter espionage direction and
policy Secret Service personnel to
dissemination of information from Secret
Service sources ciphers selection and
change of examining of enemy's ciphers
intelligence and secret service accounts
three counter espionage index of
suspects invisible inks and codes
dissemination of information from
English French and Belgian counter
espionage systems control of civil
population as affecting espionage and
all correspondence with the missions on
the subject censorship as affecting
counter espionage counter espionage
personnel regulations regarding passes
in the zone of the armies sea topography
one preparation and issue of maps and
charts all lithograph and photography in
connection with map reproduction survey
and topographical work and topographical
instruction of engineer troops
topographical organization attached from
engineers experimental sound and flash
ranging section liaison with engineer
troops d censorship 1 press
correspondence press censorship
examination of u.s. British French and
other foreign newspapers 2 compilation
and revision of censorship regulations
issue of sensor stamps postal and
telegraph censorship breaches of postal
and telegraph censorship rules
cooperation with allied censorships
control of sensor
under a sea of sg2 three official
photographs and moving pictures military
anti Shay's press matters visitors II
intelligence corps one policy with
regard to the establishment of the
Intelligence Corps records appointments
and promotions of intelligence corps
officers intelligence police
intelligence corps motorcars
administration of intelligence corps
generally the organization and structure
of AEF intelligence operations may be
characterized as follows one combat
intelligence forces attached to ground
troop units and whose primary
responsibility was to provide support to
the operations of their immediate
command and forward findings to a efg to
headquarters footnote generally on
combat intelligence during World War one
see Thomas are going lock with guy
Mirchi junior soldiers of darkness New
York
Doubleday Duran & Company 1937 Edwin a
shrine combat intelligence its
acquisition and transmission Washington
the infantry journal 1936 and Shipley
Thomas s2 in action Harrisburg the
military service publishing company 1940
and footnote 2 special support agencies
such as the Air Corps Signal Corps or
artillery intelligence which provided
relevant information to field commanders
and to a efg to headquarters and three
special agencies directly subordinate to
g2 such as interpreters cryptographers
and Secret Service counterintelligence
forces who supplied some relevant
information to other special support
agencies and to field commanders but who
also exercised some internal security
and crime control powers resulting in
the collection and maintenance of
derivative information which was
autonomously held by intelligence
headquarters these arrangements seemed
to have existed until the withdrawal of
troops from Europe and demobilization of
the Armed Forces at the
the war footnote for an academic
overview of military intelligence
organization and operations during World
War one see Walter C Sweeney military
intelligence a new weapon in war New
York Frederick a Stokes company 1924
during the World War the Signal Corps
continued to be a major supplier of
intelligence support services though it
had little direct responsibility for
intelligence operations in April 1917
just prior to the United States
declaration of war on Germany the Signal
Corps consisted of 55 officers and 1570
enlisted men of the Regular Army forces
footnote United States Army Signal Corps
report of the chief signal officer to
the Secretary of War 1919 Washington US
government print off Asst 1919 page 23
at the time of the Armistice the
strength of the Corps had risen to two
thousand seven hundred twelve officers
and fifty three thousand two hundred
seventy seven enlistees divided between
the AEF and forces in the United States
their organization at this peak strength
included 56 field signal battalions 10
Regular Army and 8 domestically
stationed 33 Telegraph battalions five
Regular Army and seven domestically
station twelve Depot battalions one
domestically station six training
battalions all domestically stationed
and forty service companies 21
domestically stationed the support
provided by the Corps for intelligence
operations though not exclusively for
these activities in every case included
communications facilities and services
photographic assistance and products
meteorologic information and code
compilation these duties would remain as
basic intelligence support services
provided by the Signal Corps until
surpassed by more specialized national
security entities in the aftermath of
World War two
[Music]
this is our hidden history